Remove configurable listening ports (#37119)
dotnet/docs: docs/core/diagnostics/diagnostic-port.md

## Configure additional diagnostic ports

> [!IMPORTANT]
> [!NOTE]
> This works for apps running .NET 5 or later only.

Both the Mono and CoreCLR runtimes can use custom configured diagnostic ports. These ports are in addition to the default port that remains available. There are a few common reasons this is useful:
Both the Mono and CoreCLR runtimes can use custom configured diagnostic ports in the `connect` role. These ports are in addition to the default port that remains available. There are a few common reasons this is useful:

- On Android, iOS and tvOS there is no default port, so configuring a port is necessary to use diagnostic tools.
- In environments with containers or firewalls, you may want to set up a predictable endpoint address that doesn't vary based on process id as the default port does. Then the custom port can be explicitly added to an allow list or proxied across some security boundary.

> - For monitoring tools it is useful to have the tool listen on an endpoint, and the runtime actively attempts to connect to it. This avoids needing the monitoring tool to continuously poll for new apps starting. In environments where the default diagnostic port isn't accessible, it also avoids needing to configure the monitor with a custom endpoint for each monitored app.

Author: I removed this third reason since I wasn't sure if it was still possible - please confirm.

Reviewer: adding @lateralusX to take a look

> - For monitoring tools it is useful to have the tool listen on an endpoint, and the runtime actively attempts to connect to it. This avoids needing the monitoring tool to continuously poll for new apps starting. In environments where the default diagnostic port isn't accessible, it also avoids needing to configure the monitor with a custom endpoint for each monitored app.

Reviewer 2: This paragraph still holds true - the runtime still has connect mode such hat the monitor tool can just listen on a port rather than connect-loop poll.

> 1. `DOTNET_DiagnosticPorts=/foo/tool1.socket,nosuspend` - (Linux and macOS) This example has the `nosuspend` modifier. The runtime creates and connects to Unix Domain Socket `/foo/tool1.socket`. Additional diagnostic ports would normally cause the runtime to suspend at startup waiting for a resume command, but `nosuspend` causes the runtime not to wait.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. `DOTNET_DiagnosticPorts=/foo/tool1.socket,nosuspend` - (Linux and macOS) This example has the `nosuspend` modifier. The runtime tries to connect to Unix Domain Socket `/foo/tool1.socket` that an external tool creates. Additional diagnostic ports would normally cause the runtime to suspend at startup waiting for a resume command, but `nosuspend` causes the runtime not to wait.
```

- Linux and macOS - Unix Domain Socket `{temp}/dotnet-diagnostic-{pid}-{disambiguation_key}-socket`

`{pid}` is the process id written in decimal, `{temp}` is the `TMPDIR` environment variable or the value `/tmp` if `TMPDIR` is undefined/empty, and `{disambiguation_key}` is the process start time written in decimal. On macOS and NetBSD, the process start time is number of seconds since UNIX epoch time. On all other platforms, it's jiffies since boot time.

## Suspend the runtime at startup

By default, the runtime executes managed code as soon as it starts, regardless of whether any diagnostic tools have connected to the diagnostic port. Sometimes it's useful to have the runtime wait to run managed code until after a diagnostic tool is connected, to observe the initial program behavior. Setting environment variable `DOTNET_DefaultDiagnosticPortSuspend=1` causes the runtime to wait until a tool connects to the default port. If no tool is attached after several seconds, the runtime prints a warning message to the console explaining that it's still waiting for a tool to attach.

## Configure additional diagnostic ports

> [!NOTE]
> This works for apps running .NET 5 or later only.

> Both the Mono and CoreCLR runtimes can use custom configured diagnostic ports in the `connect` role. These ports are in addition to the default port that remains available. There are a few common reasons this is useful:

Reviewer 3: Mono supports custom TCP/IP listening ports, used on Android/iOS together with dotnet-dsrouter.

- On Android, iOS, and tvOS there's no default port, so configuring a port is necessary to use diagnostic tools.
- In environments with containers or firewalls, you may want to set up a predictable endpoint address that doesn't vary based on process ID as the default port does. Then the custom port can be explicitly added to an allow list or proxied across some security boundary.
- For monitoring tools it is useful to have the tool listen on an endpoint, and the runtime actively attempts to connect to it. This avoids needing the monitoring tool to continuously poll for new apps starting. In environments where the default diagnostic port isn't accessible, it also avoids needing to configure the monitor with a custom endpoint for each monitored app.

> In each communication channel between a diagnostic tool and the .NET runtime, one side needs to be the listener and wait for the other side to connect. The runtime can be configured to act in the `connect` role for any port. Ports can also be independently configured to suspend at startup, waiting for a diagnostic tool to issue a resume command. Ports configured to connect repeat their connection attempts indefinitely if the remote endpoint isn't listening or if the connection is lost. But the app does not automatically suspend managed code while waiting to establish that connection. If you want the app to wait for a connection to be established, use the suspend at startup option.

Reviewer 3: Mono also supports custom listen ports.

1. `DOTNET_DiagnosticPorts=my_diag_port1` - (Windows) The runtime connects to the named pipe `\\.\pipe\my_diag_port1`.
1. `DOTNET_DiagnosticPorts=/foo/tool1.socket;foo/tool2.socket` - (Linux and macOS) The runtime connects to both the Unix Domain Sockets `/foo/tool1.socket` and `/foo/tool2.socket`.
1. `DOTNET_DiagnosticPorts=127.0.0.1:9000` - (Android, iOS, and tvOS) The runtime connects to IP 127.0.0.1 on port 9000.
1. `DOTNET_DiagnosticPorts=/foo/tool1.socket,nosuspend` - (Linux and macOS) This example has the `nosuspend` modifier. The runtime tries to connect to Unix Domain Socket `/foo/tool1.socket` that an external tool creates. Additional diagnostic ports would normally cause the runtime to suspend at startup waiting for a resume command, but `nosuspend` causes the runtime not to wait.

> The complete syntax for a port is `address[,(suspend|nosuspend)]`. `suspend` is the default if neither `suspend` or `nosuspend` is specified.

Reviewer 3: Mono on Android/iOS supports both connect and listen mode.
